Yeah.
NOTE CONF
It wouldn't be anything too long.
I mean, it would only be like a kind of
NOTE CONF
4 to 5 minute break.
You do the questions, then, okay?
NOTE CONF
It's gone bad.
So do you want to.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Okay, everyone.
NOTE CONF
So we've got a shout out or a little explanation
about something from Luke before we go on to the
NOTE CONF
lecture.
Yep.
NOTE CONF
Do I just use this?
Hello, everyone.
NOTE CONF
I am Luke.
I am a fourth year computer science student, and I
NOTE CONF
am just going to briefly run you through my dissertation
project, which is studying the effects of AI coding assistance.
NOTE CONF
So just talking a bit about quickly the usage of
AI coding assistance.
NOTE CONF
So recent years Chennai coding systems have been on the
rise.
NOTE CONF
So ones like GitHub, Co-Pilot, intellisense.
I'm sure some of you have heard of these and
NOTE CONF
have possibly used them.
Um.
NOTE CONF
Here is a file and read a Stack Overflow.
Do you currently use AI tools in your development process,
NOTE CONF
which was about a 5050 split for yes, but this
data was a bit old, so you might extrapolate.
NOTE CONF
It's quite a bit higher now and is currently unknown
how effective these assistants are, which is when I move
NOTE CONF
on to what is my project about.
So my project studies, if Jenny coding assistance are useful
NOTE CONF
to students and for learning in general, and also in
the professional environment, but not too so how and why
NOTE CONF
you could help me with, um, looking and collecting data
to find some answers to this so you can volunteer.
NOTE CONF
Sorry, volunteered to participate.
So I've got a QR code at the end that
NOTE CONF
you can sign up to.
It's a very easy setup.
NOTE CONF
It just requires you to run the executable.
It's it's pre-packaged, comes with questions, tests, um and integrated
NOTE CONF
it that you can run.
I've just got a little picture here if you'd like
NOTE CONF
to take a look.
So this is what it would look like when you
NOTE CONF
open the research software in your browser.
So on the left hand side you would have preloaded
NOTE CONF
questions.
These are based on the lab questions for the course.
NOTE CONF
So you've got which one do I put.
You've got a simple just reversing an array in here.
NOTE CONF
You'd write your code in there you can click the
run code button.
NOTE CONF
And you would have a range of tests that you
can test your code on.
NOTE CONF
And on the right hand side.
This would be where you talk to the coding assistant,
NOTE CONF
and it would be able to see your code, see
the context, and give you tips on how you can
NOTE CONF
improve it.
So here is the QR code if you'd like to
NOTE CONF
sign up.
I'll just leave that up for a minute.
NOTE CONF
Thank you everyone for your time.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Thanks, Luke.
So if you're interested in that, use the QR code
NOTE CONF
to sign up.
So just to be really clear about how this interacts
NOTE CONF
with the course policy on JNI.
So as Luke has said, how JNI can help develop
NOTE CONF
your learning.
As as a coda is really still is very experimental.
NOTE CONF
That's what Luke's doing research into.
So our policy in infancy at the moment is that
NOTE CONF
I do not want you to use JNI.
You're not allowed to use them for assignments, but I
NOTE CONF
don't recommend you use JNI for your practice, because what
you're trying to do is to learn to develop the
NOTE CONF
skills yourself is really unclear whether you if you use
JNI too much.
NOTE CONF
I think it is clear that you're not going to
get that full skill development.
NOTE CONF
So if you want to get involved in this project
with Luke, what are you going to do?
NOTE CONF
You're going to sign up.
And then we're going to work with that group of
NOTE CONF
people who are working with Luke to think about how
this interacts with your learning to make sure that you're
NOTE CONF
not doing all your learning with JNI, but in some
cases, to to work with Luke on his research, you
NOTE CONF
will be using JNI.
But in general, I don't want you to be using
NOTE CONF
JNI because I want you to be learning how to
do these basic skills yourself.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so, um, sign up if you like.
Um, I guess Luke might want to send out an
NOTE CONF
email about that.
So you might see an email, um, following this up.
NOTE CONF
Um, but this doesn't change the policy on AI.
It's just a specific research project that there's an opportunity
NOTE CONF
for you guys to get involved with.
Is really interesting.
NOTE CONF
Being involved in research.
This is you know, this is really fundamental stuff that's
NOTE CONF
probably going to be changing how we're teaching.
So I would definitely recommend you signing up for that
NOTE CONF
if you're interested in that.
And we'll work with those students to to think about
NOTE CONF
how that's going to impact on their course.
I mean, it's not going to impact on it much,
NOTE CONF
but we're just going to look at general policy with
respect to people working with Luke.
NOTE CONF
Okay, great.
Thank you.
NOTE CONF
Now let me yeah.
Thank you.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So a couple of things to go over to begin
NOTE CONF
with.
Um tutorials.
NOTE CONF
Oh my goodness tutorials.
So tutorials have started.
NOTE CONF
Uh, those of you who had tutorials yesterday, um, will
have already had them.
NOTE CONF
Most of you, although there's been an issue with this
um, and some of you will have tutorials today and
NOTE CONF
tomorrow.
So there's two issues with this.
NOTE CONF
So one of the things is all of you are
in tutorial groups of around 12 to 15 students, and
NOTE CONF
then the tutorial sessions are groups of 3 or 4
of these separate groups, all in one time.
NOTE CONF
So you will have a tutor who's just your tutor
for about 12 to 15 of you.
NOTE CONF
And in your tutorial session, there'll be 3 or 4
of these tutors working with their groups, but they can
NOTE CONF
also help students in other groups.
And also a super tutor who's a member of staff
NOTE CONF
who will be just overseeing and mentoring the the tutors
and providing additional support.
NOTE CONF
Um, however, timetabling for some reason have just put you
all in six massive groups, so you're just in a
NOTE CONF
group with everyone else on your big tutorial.
That means you don't have a specific tutor assigned at
NOTE CONF
the moment, which is not how it's supposed to be.
I don't know why it's been done like this.
NOTE CONF
I'm working with timetabling.
I haven't it's not sorted out yet.
NOTE CONF
Um, you.
Once you've been to your tutorial, you should see who
NOTE CONF
all your tutors are.
I don't know whether you can see any names.
NOTE CONF
Associate of tutors.
Okay, that's not good.
NOTE CONF
You should be able to get in touch with your
tutors.
NOTE CONF
I'll try and get this sorted ASAP.
In the meantime, if you have a question you need
NOTE CONF
to put to your tutor, send it to me or
to one of the Tas and we can make sure
NOTE CONF
it gets the right place.
So I'm really sorry about this.
NOTE CONF
The other thing is, I have heard that yesterday afternoon
people in the 330 tutorial.
NOTE CONF
It suddenly disappeared from your timetables.
Is that right?
NOTE CONF
I have no idea what's happened with that.
We haven't moved the tutorial slot.
NOTE CONF
Your tutorial slot is as advertised 330 on Wednesday in
the room it's supposed to be in.
NOTE CONF
I have no idea why that happened.
I'm really sorry about that.
NOTE CONF
I think that caused some of the students not to
go along to tutorial.
NOTE CONF
If so, you've missed out on the first tutorial.
If you're able to make one of the extra sessions
NOTE CONF
today or tomorrow.
You can see on the website where they are and
NOTE CONF
when they are.
Do try and go along to that.
NOTE CONF
Um, if not, you can make it up yourself.
If you're worried about this, get in touch with me.
NOTE CONF
Maybe we can organise a bit of an extra session,
but it's difficult to find the time to do this.
NOTE CONF
I'm completely baffled by this, and again, I've not got
any answers.
NOTE CONF
I've emailed urgently to find out what that's about.
I can only apologise.
NOTE CONF
I'm sorry.
That's causing confusion.
NOTE CONF
Um, and as always, any concerns?
Put, um.
NOTE CONF
Put a post on Piazza.
Come along to my office hour on Monday.
NOTE CONF
Or email the course Tas or me.
So the the undergraduate ceilidh.
NOTE CONF
Obviously that was cancelled because the university was closed last
Friday because of the storms, which is really annoying, but
NOTE CONF
it has been rescheduled.
If you had a ticket, you probably have heard already
NOTE CONF
it's going to be the 12th of February I think.
So if you had a ticket previously that will transfer
NOTE CONF
over.
If you're not able to make the new date, you
NOTE CONF
can get a refund.
We may have more tickets available, depending if there's quite
NOTE CONF
a few ticket holders who are not able to make
the new date.
NOTE CONF
There might be tickets available for those who didn't have
them for the last one.
NOTE CONF
If so, um, we'll let you know and I hope
that it'll go ahead without any problems this time.
NOTE CONF
Um, okay.
The only other thing to mention is the session on
NOTE CONF
Monday, which, as I've said before, will be this double
session.
NOTE CONF
Um, and we'll provide we'll be providing lunch.
So it's just a kind of free lunch should be
NOTE CONF
quite a chill session, but I think it's going to
be really helpful for you to think about your first
NOTE CONF
year and think about your path through university.
Um, some of you have signed up to be volunteers.
NOTE CONF
Fantastic.
Thank you so much.
NOTE CONF
I'm not sure if Becker's got in touch with you
yet, but if not, we will be doing that really
NOTE CONF
soon.
We just want you to come along slightly early and
NOTE CONF
go over what we're going to be doing.
So I'm really excited about that.
NOTE CONF
Um, and, uh, yeah, we'll see how that goes.
All right.
NOTE CONF
So now let's go back to the session.
So where are we?
NOTE CONF
Oh come on, don't be annoying.
Why is it frozen?
NOTE CONF
Interesting.
Page on response.
NOTE CONF
Oh, here we go.
All right.
NOTE CONF
So where are we from?
Lots of interesting things coming up here.
NOTE CONF
Some of these are genuine, some of them not.
Um, part of the lecture.
NOTE CONF
This is Owen, who's a German springer spaniel.
I love that picture.
NOTE CONF
It just looks so, um.
It looks like a really professional picture, actually.
NOTE CONF
He looks so active.
I love those ears they have that are all furry.
NOTE CONF
It's really cool.
And this is sparkle.
NOTE CONF
He's a Pomeranian.
Different sort of dog, but it looks very cute with
NOTE CONF
the little jacket on.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, okay.
I just want to ask this.
NOTE CONF
Uh, we had a bit of discussion about this last
session, and there were different views on this.
NOTE CONF
I'm happy to do it in dark.
Some people find that harder to see.
NOTE CONF
Oh, okay.
Everybody wants it in dark mode.
NOTE CONF
Interesting.
All right.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
That seems fairly clear that I should change to dark
NOTE CONF
mode.
All right.
NOTE CONF
Okay, fine.
Um, biscuits.
NOTE CONF
I'm just going to leave that open for a short
while so you can vote.
NOTE CONF
For what?
Biscuits in the next office.
NOTE CONF
Our last time we had rich teas, which I was
really pleased about because they're my favourites.
NOTE CONF
And, um, loads of people came, which was awesome.
Some people with questions, some people just to say hi,
NOTE CONF
um, and which is really great.
Oh, Oreos.
NOTE CONF
Okay, that looks like the most popular at the moment.
Um, okay, I'm going to give you another minute because
NOTE CONF
I want to turn it on to the next question.
Okay, I'll tell you what.
NOTE CONF
I'm going to leave that open whilst I'm doing the
end of this lecture.
NOTE CONF
And then we're going to then I'm going to put
it onto the ask me any questions.
NOTE CONF
So I'm not going over the questions from last time
because there were no questions last time.
NOTE CONF
I don't know whether nobody has any questions at all,
but I think actually probably it's because I put it
NOTE CONF
up too late.
So you guys are all leaving before that was available.
NOTE CONF
So what I'm going to do now, in a minute,
I'm going to move on from the biscuits one.
NOTE CONF
And there are no, um, interactive questions for this session.
So what that means is that you can now start
NOTE CONF
putting up your questions so you can put them up
at any stage.
NOTE CONF
And I will answer them on Monday.
All right.
NOTE CONF
So just to go back to what we were talking
about last time.
NOTE CONF
So last time we were looking at objects, right?
Why do we do object oriented programming?
NOTE CONF
What is an object?
How do you create an object and how does that
NOTE CONF
relate to classes?
Okay, so there's just a couple of things to finalise
NOTE CONF
from this.
So we looked at using methods.
NOTE CONF
Right.
And the notation you use for methods is is the
NOTE CONF
dot.
So what this means is this is the method start
NOTE CONF
engine is the method that I want to use.
And I want to use I want to apply that
NOTE CONF
method to this object.
Right.
NOTE CONF
So I'm starting the engine of this car.
You always have the round brackets for the arguments to
NOTE CONF
go in.
Sometimes there will be actual arguments that you need to
NOTE CONF
be in there, sometimes that will be empty, that will
be defined, and you need to know the method definition
NOTE CONF
well.
You don't need to know the method definition.
NOTE CONF
You need to know the signature to see what arguments
the method would expect.
NOTE CONF
And IntelliJ will always be able to tell you that.
Um, okay.
NOTE CONF
And but here we also saw earlier we saw this
application dot here.
NOTE CONF
So this is applying a method.
But math is not an object.
NOTE CONF
Math is a class, right?
So this essentially what this means is you're calling method
NOTE CONF
random on the class math.
That means there is a method called random that is
NOTE CONF
defined within the maths class.
That's what I want you to use.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So that is what that means.
NOTE CONF
It's the same operator but it can be used either
on instances, which means do this to that instance or
NOTE CONF
it can be used in classes, which means this is
where you'll find the definition.
NOTE CONF
Um, so instance methods are associated in object um, and
you need the object name to say what you're going
NOTE CONF
to apply it to.
Whereas class methods are associated with a class that's fairly
NOTE CONF
explanatory.
Class methods are globally available.
NOTE CONF
That means that you um, that means that you anywhere
within the class, you can use it.
NOTE CONF
And sometimes you need to import things.
We'll be looking at that later.
NOTE CONF
But if you want to use things from a different
class you can import that.
NOTE CONF
And then that means your code can see any of
these, um, class methods.
NOTE CONF
They're also static.
Uh, we'll get on to explain a bit what that
NOTE CONF
means in future lectures.
But for now, just just remember that they're static.
NOTE CONF
Um, so static, static behaviour, which which is to do
with how much you can change how things behave.
NOTE CONF
But there's also static states, which means things can't change
states easily.
NOTE CONF
And that's useful for constants.
Um, so global constants um this is a global constant.
NOTE CONF
So in within math we're defining this constant pi.
We're going to make this final because we don't want
NOTE CONF
anybody to be able to change pi.
Pi is just a thing that's always going to be
NOTE CONF
the same.
Um, and we're declaring it public static and final.
NOTE CONF
And that that means the public.
This means that it's a global constant.
NOTE CONF
And we'll be practising these these modifiers a lot more
in future lectures.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So just to go back to why object orientation is
NOTE CONF
important is this is the dominant paradigm in programming.
That is because it's really helpful for good software engineering
NOTE CONF
principles, because it's used to objects used to model real
world domains, or real world entities and domain concepts, and
NOTE CONF
the way in which these change is much slower than
the way in which the world in general evolves.
NOTE CONF
So object oriented object orientation puts things together.
That's changes together.
NOTE CONF
So if you if you want to say something different
about cars, if you want to develop the behaviour of
NOTE CONF
objects, there's a specific place that you do that.
That is in the class definition.
NOTE CONF
And it's all clear.
It's clear where it comes from.
NOTE CONF
And once you make changes in there, that filters out
to everything that every instance of that class is very
NOTE CONF
nice and neat.
And this is just about the types I don't think
NOTE CONF
it's worth going through this, but just another really important
thing we covered is about the double equals and the
NOTE CONF
dot equals where double equals is comparing the references.
Are these the same object which means do they occupy
NOTE CONF
the same place in memory or are they just equal?
Where all their values might be the same, but they're
NOTE CONF
living in a different part of part of memory?
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So now I'm going to move this on.
Let's see the biscuits.
NOTE CONF
Oreos is the winner right I'll bring Oreos but I
might bring digestives next time.
NOTE CONF
I don't like Oreos very much, but that's okay.
I'll bring them for you guys.
NOTE CONF
And by the way, after after the session, if there's
any left, there were actually some left last time because
NOTE CONF
I got a really big pack of which I just
leave them in the kitchen and.
NOTE CONF
606 so if you don't make it along, you might
be able to get a biscuit anyway if you go
NOTE CONF
along there before they're all eaten.
Okay, so I'm just leaving this up.
NOTE CONF
I'm not going to look at it for now, but
um, yeah, okay.
NOTE CONF
That's super helpful.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
The more you do this, the more I just have
to spend my time going through deleting them before I
NOTE CONF
can actually answer any real questions.
So I'd really appreciate it if you didn't do it
NOTE CONF
all that much.
Okay, so now we are looking at testing and debugging.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So the rule of thumb is coding is that there's
NOTE CONF
usually an error in your code somewhere.
So when you're just beginning coding, a lot of people
NOTE CONF
have the feeling that, okay, mistakes is something you make
in the beginning.
NOTE CONF
And as you get better at coding, you're going to
know how to do this properly and you won't be
NOTE CONF
making mistakes very often.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
That is absolutely not how coding works.
Making mistakes and coding is absolutely part of what happens
NOTE CONF
when you're coding.
Code gets really complex.
NOTE CONF
The logic gets really complex.
It's really easy to make mistakes and it's basically impossible
NOTE CONF
to avoid.
Nobody can really do a lot of coding without making
NOTE CONF
quite frequent mistakes.
That's inevitable, and it can be a massive problem if
NOTE CONF
you release code to tons of people, which has got
fundamental errors in it, then that's a huge problem.
NOTE CONF
My husband was actually super stressed yesterday because he's a
software engineer, and he'd released some code that there was
NOTE CONF
an error and it wasn't a huge thing, but it
was having impacts on clients and he was having to
NOTE CONF
get his colleagues to help and it was like really
stressful.
NOTE CONF
I think it's been sorted out now and it turned
out not to be too terrible, but this is something
NOTE CONF
you really, really want to avoid, right?
You will make mistakes.
NOTE CONF
You do not want those mistakes to live in the
code that's then being sent out to people, because that's
NOTE CONF
going to cause a lot of problems for you and
for whoever you work for.
NOTE CONF
So what do we do about this?
Well, what we do about this is we try and
NOTE CONF
avoid them.
And if we and if they exist, if they do
NOTE CONF
come along and we try and fix them, okay.
But first of all, looking at the there's three, three
NOTE CONF
different kinds of errors syntax errors, runtime errors and logical
errors okay.
NOTE CONF
So syntax errors are kind of like a spelling mistake.
You're just using the language incorrectly.
NOTE CONF
This is unlikely to happen when you're more experienced, but
it's usually something you know.
NOTE CONF
You just do it carelessly.
You forget something.
NOTE CONF
Um using an IDE, this is.
These are pretty easy to pick up.
NOTE CONF
IntelliJ is going to tell you about this sort of
stuff.
NOTE CONF
Um, syntax errors are usually not picked up before you
run it.
NOTE CONF
So if you have a syntax error.
Yeah sorry.
NOTE CONF
Syntax error.
Yeah it's syntax error.
NOTE CONF
So they're picked up at compile time right.
So you can't run a program with a syntax error
NOTE CONF
and it's not going to run.
So if you're doing it the command line when you
NOTE CONF
compile it that's when it's going to break.
If you're doing IntelliJ it just won't let you run
NOTE CONF
it.
Um so usually these are fairly easy to identify, particularly
NOTE CONF
with an IDE.
But it's not always the case.
NOTE CONF
So what's going on here?
Illegal start of expression.
NOTE CONF
So this is the this is the information it gives
you is a little bit unclear exactly what that means.
NOTE CONF
Um, so and exactly what that means I'm not going
to go into details, but the point is it gives
NOTE CONF
you error messages.
Usually these are pretty clear, but sometimes it's a little
NOTE CONF
bit hard to understand.
So runtime errors maybe that's a bit more like a
NOTE CONF
grammar mistake.
Um, and this means you can compile it and you
NOTE CONF
can run it, but when you run it, it's you're
going to get some kind of error.
NOTE CONF
So this is your classic obvious entry level runtime error.
We've looked at this several times before.
NOTE CONF
You're looking for something in the in at index for
in an array.
NOTE CONF
That's for long.
When we know an array that is for long, the
NOTE CONF
the biggest index of the end index is going to
be three.
NOTE CONF
So this does not exist.
But you can compile it.
NOTE CONF
It's not going to show up errors in the in
IntelliJ because that is there's no syntax error.
NOTE CONF
But when it runs it's going to be trying to
do something that's impossible and that's going to fail.
NOTE CONF
You're going to get an error message.
So this would say we've seen this before.
NOTE CONF
Index array index out of bounds exception.
Um okay.
NOTE CONF
Logical errors.
So most of the time the kinds of errors you're
NOTE CONF
going to get are logical errors.
Right.
NOTE CONF
So this means the Java is syntactically correct.
And the Java is doing exactly what you have told
NOTE CONF
it you want it to do.
But what you've told it to do is not actually
NOTE CONF
quite what you really meant to tell it.
So you thought you were giving correct instructions, but actually
NOTE CONF
your instructions were either not clear or not quite correct,
and it's doing something wrong.
NOTE CONF
So here we've got a classic example.
We're trying to add things but we're using minus here.
NOTE CONF
We've got for example the statement this one is an
orange bird.
NOTE CONF
That's a perfectly reasonable thing to say in English.
It just isn't true.
NOTE CONF
There's a there's a logical error there.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So you're not going to get any help from IntelliJ
with these errors.
NOTE CONF
You're going to get a lot of help to find
out where they are.
NOTE CONF
But it's not going to tell you what these errors
are because it doesn't know you've told it.
NOTE CONF
That adding means subtraction.
And it's like, fine, this is this is how we're
NOTE CONF
defining this.
This is working perfectly.
NOTE CONF
Well.
You've got to see where the logical error lies.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So let's have a look at some of these examples.
NOTE CONF
So I'm going to try and run this.
Now you can already say you can already see I've
NOTE CONF
got a syntax error here.
Right.
NOTE CONF
Because there's lots of red.
IntelliJ is not happy.
NOTE CONF
You have something that's red, you can't run it.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So it's just it's it's it's just going to tell
me what the problems are.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So it's saying, um, colon is expected.
NOTE CONF
If we look in here, it's going to tell me
a little bit more about that.
NOTE CONF
So it's in line five I can see that.
So and then problems further on.
NOTE CONF
But this is coming out of a problem that happens
earlier.
NOTE CONF
So can anybody see what is the problem with this.
Any thoughts.
NOTE CONF
Yeah exactly.
So in the for loop instead of separating these by
NOTE CONF
semicolons I've separated them by commas.
And this is actually weirdly something I do quite often
NOTE CONF
even though I use Java quite a bit.
So during semester, um, doesn't like that.
NOTE CONF
So you saw that there were when I had this
comma in it's also saying, okay, there's a problem here.
NOTE CONF
And the problem here is it can't resolve the symbol
I.
NOTE CONF
So you have to be a little bit careful when
you're looking at the information.
NOTE CONF
And an IDE is telling you, and to try to
see that you're at the root of the problem, right?
NOTE CONF
Because there's no objective problem with this AI.
The problem is because I've got this error up here.
NOTE CONF
AI is not properly defined.
And that means when I try and use it later,
NOTE CONF
um, it's not happy with this.
It doesn't know enough about AI.
NOTE CONF
Um, but that's not really the root of the problem.
If I'm just looking at this and say, can't resolve
NOTE CONF
simple AI.
It's not that very helpful.
NOTE CONF
I need to look back to here and say, oh,
okay, this for statement is not right.
NOTE CONF
Change that.
And then these are going to resolve themselves.
NOTE CONF
So you've got to look at the root of the
problem.
NOTE CONF
It's going to spread out to lots of other problems
later on.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So that is the first problem.
NOTE CONF
Now I'm going to try and run it.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So that is that is going to compile.
But when I run it I get an array index
NOTE CONF
out of bounds exception.
And why is this.
NOTE CONF
I think you should know why.
This is something we've talked about quite a lot.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
That's exactly, exactly.
NOTE CONF
So as we've seen before, we have to put length
minus one, because the final index of an array is
NOTE CONF
at length minus one because it starts at zero.
So let's run this.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Perfect.
NOTE CONF
So it runs.
There's no problem.
NOTE CONF
There's no compile errors.
There's no runtime errors.
NOTE CONF
And it's telling me the smallest number of this array
I've made from 1 to 5 is five.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So is that the answer that we want to get.
NOTE CONF
No, that's not the answer we want to get because
that isn't true right.
NOTE CONF
So this is a logical error.
It's doing exactly what I told it to do.
NOTE CONF
Without any problems.
However, I didn't tell it to do what I actually
NOTE CONF
wanted it to do.
So what's the problem with this?
NOTE CONF
Anyone see what the problem is?
Actually IntelliJ here.
NOTE CONF
What's IntelliJ saying?
It's this?
NOTE CONF
Intel's just saying something helpful?
Oh, yeah.
NOTE CONF
Uh, the problem is this, right?
I've said I'm.
NOTE CONF
When I'm doing the comparison, I'm always saying if, um,
the number is bigger than the smallest number, then overwrite
NOTE CONF
what the smallest number is.
But of course that shouldn't happen.
NOTE CONF
You only want to overwrite the current smallest number.
If this is great, if it's or if it's smaller
NOTE CONF
than it, then we don't care about the previous smallest
number.
NOTE CONF
This is the new smallest number, so I change that
around I run that and that tells me the smallest
NOTE CONF
number is one.
So I've sorted out my logical error.
NOTE CONF
So those are the three times three types of errors.
You will come across all of them, but the one
NOTE CONF
that's going to cause the most amount of trouble in
your life are the logical errors.
NOTE CONF
Oh my God.
Seriously.
NOTE CONF
I mean, I if anyone has any actual questions, I'm
not prepared to spend an hour wading through random messages.
NOTE CONF
Um, and I mean, I'm.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Anyway, Okay, so what are we saying here?
So this.
NOTE CONF
So here we are looking at exactly the same thing.
Um, okay.
NOTE CONF
So we want to test the code and we're going
to look at how we test that.
NOTE CONF
Um and this is the difficulty of fixing them syntax
errors.
NOTE CONF
You get a load of help, runtime errors.
You get some help.
NOTE CONF
Logical errors are harder.
Um, okay, so let's have a look at this.
NOTE CONF
Testing and debugging.
So what is the difference between testing and debugging.
NOTE CONF
Um, so, so in this Calvin Hobbs cartoon, what's happening
is he's letting out a bug.
NOTE CONF
And as he's doing that, a whole ton of new
bugs are coming in.
NOTE CONF
So this can happen really easily, right?
You find an underlying problem and you fix it, but
NOTE CONF
that's going to spiral out to all sorts of things.
And you need to be really careful thinking about how
NOTE CONF
you're going to manage that.
Um, so you have a cycle, right?
NOTE CONF
So first of all, you create a test.
You run the test and that test fails.
NOTE CONF
So you create a so you create a new feature
that's going to solve that problem.
NOTE CONF
You run the test and the test passes.
And then you have to refactor which means you change
NOTE CONF
the code.
You've got to run it through all the other tests
NOTE CONF
and update your code and you've got it.
This is a cycle, right?
NOTE CONF
You keep testing whenever it fails, you keep refactoring the
code so that it's going to it's going to pass
NOTE CONF
all of your tests.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So let's have a look at this in practice.
So we want the calculator.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So this is something a slight extension of how we
NOTE CONF
have been using Java before.
So here is a class called calculator right.
NOTE CONF
And can you see anything that is missing from calculator
that has been in all the other classes that we've
NOTE CONF
defined so far.
Ah.
NOTE CONF
Sorry.
Uh, so it's so void.
NOTE CONF
So all of all of the methods in here are
returning something, so we don't know whether there's a void
NOTE CONF
here.
No, actually this isn't.
NOTE CONF
So the class wouldn't have a return type.
The methods would.
NOTE CONF
And they all do, and that's fine.
But what we don't have here is a main method.
NOTE CONF
Right?
So in Java the main method is always the entry
NOTE CONF
point into any class.
So as you can see normally in Java we have
NOTE CONF
these little arrows.
And that's what we use to run it.
NOTE CONF
There are no arrows here right.
We can't run anything because there's no entry point to
NOTE CONF
this class okay.
And that's fine.
NOTE CONF
You will often be defining classes like this.
There's no entry into them directly for the user, but
NOTE CONF
that's the way into them is by calling these methods
from other from other classes.
NOTE CONF
So here we have calculator client.
This is a class that will use our calculator class.
NOTE CONF
And this has a main method so it can be
run.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So let's use some of these things.
NOTE CONF
Mhm.
So in calculator we have three methods.
NOTE CONF
We've got add which adds two numbers together.
Multiply which multiplies two two numbers together and increment all
NOTE CONF
which takes an array.
And it adds a, it adds a number an integer
NOTE CONF
to every element of that array.
And we pass in both the array and the number
NOTE CONF
that we want it to be incremented by.
So let's start with um add return.
NOTE CONF
So we'll create a variable called add return which is
going to be an integer.
NOTE CONF
And we are going to we're going to send this
to add okay with two okay.
NOTE CONF
Give me two integers.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And 12.
Cool okay.
NOTE CONF
But it doesn't know what Add is right.
Because it can only see inside this class.
NOTE CONF
So um this is like there's no add right.
Because add is in calculator.
NOTE CONF
So what I need to do as we saw before
with maths I'm going to put calculator.
NOTE CONF
Oops.
Calculator ad.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
What this means is I want to use a method
NOTE CONF
ad from this class calculator.
And this is going to create this variable.
NOTE CONF
And then I'm going to return it.
Now I'm not going to return it.
NOTE CONF
Sorry I'm going to print it.
Um I'm going to say um seven plus 12.
NOTE CONF
Uh equals and then I'm going to say whatever my,
my program tells me it equals.
NOTE CONF
So let's run this, see what happens.
So now you can see we've got the arrows.
NOTE CONF
We can run this.
And it's going to tell me seven plus 12 is
NOTE CONF
19 which is correct.
Actually this is supposed to not work.
NOTE CONF
But I just remembered I didn't put it back.
Okay so but what if it what if it did
NOTE CONF
this right?
It's not complaining about this.
NOTE CONF
This is completely fine.
Java.
NOTE CONF
There's no problem with this.
But if I then go on to run this, it's
NOTE CONF
going to tell me seven plus 12 is minus five,
right?
NOTE CONF
That's not the answer I was looking for.
This is a logical error.
NOTE CONF
And if I go back to here I can see
what's going on.
NOTE CONF
But what do I do?
How do I.
NOTE CONF
So how do I pick these up as I go
along?
NOTE CONF
Actually let's have a look at let's first of all
look at the integer array.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So I'm going to create an array called first array.
NOTE CONF
And this is going to be an array of integers.
And it's just going to be let's just make it
NOTE CONF
12345.
And okay first of all I'm just going to print
NOTE CONF
it out.
And so we saw before you can't just print an
NOTE CONF
array that's going to print nonsense.
You can do you can loop through an array.
NOTE CONF
But there's also another way of doing it.
And actually some of you were using this method in
NOTE CONF
the tutorial.
It's not one we've looked at yet, but it's one
NOTE CONF
we're looking at now.
And it's just the two strings method two strings.
NOTE CONF
So I can do arrays dot two string.
What this does is it turns an array into a
NOTE CONF
string and then I can print it out.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So if I print that that's just going to print
the array.
NOTE CONF
So what I'm going to do now is I'm going
to, um, call the method I want to use here
NOTE CONF
is increment all.
And that's from the calculator class.
NOTE CONF
So it's calculated dot increment all.
And as always IntelliJ is really useful.
NOTE CONF
So it knows what methods are in the calculator class.
So it's going to suggest what's possible.
NOTE CONF
Um and I'm going to send first array plus a
number to increment it.
NOTE CONF
For what.
What should I use.
NOTE CONF
Fine three okay.
Now I'm going to print out the new array.
NOTE CONF
So remember we looked at this last time um here
with adding I need to assign this to a particular
NOTE CONF
value.
And then I need to return that value.
NOTE CONF
Right.
Whereas because the change is local and the change will
NOTE CONF
only come back to me if I pick it up
in a return value, but with an array, because it's
NOTE CONF
changing things directly in memory.
I don't have to send anything back and pick that
NOTE CONF
up.
I just can print out the array rate again.
NOTE CONF
Um, so these two lines.
Oh, I've got to do two string again.
NOTE CONF
Um, so these two lines are exactly the same, but
they're going to be doing something different, because in the
NOTE CONF
meantime, I've gone off to another place and I've messed
around in memory changing what's going on.
NOTE CONF
So I could do that.
Let's run that.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So here we can see this is the same array.
NOTE CONF
Uh, increased by a certain amount by three, in fact.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So but we've got this problem here, right?
Seven plus 12 is minus five.
NOTE CONF
So this we don't want this to happen.
So we want to write code that will make sure
NOTE CONF
either this doesn't happen or we're going to pick it
up if things do happen.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So we so we were able to tell that something
NOTE CONF
had happened because we printed out a statement and we
could we we'd set it up so we can see
NOTE CONF
okay, this is telling us something that's clearly not true.
So that's clearly a useful thing to do.
NOTE CONF
If I hadn't done this and I was using this
number and other things.
NOTE CONF
I might not know that this problem had happened, so
this is helpful.
NOTE CONF
However, print statements are kind of messy.
They mess up the output and you can only really
NOTE CONF
see them internally.
So there's other ways to do this.
NOTE CONF
Um, we can let's just comment that out.
Oops.
NOTE CONF
So one way of doing this is by using assert.
So I'm going to say assert add return is equivalent
NOTE CONF
to seven plus 12.
So normally I'd want to do this in a more
NOTE CONF
general way with that with not with these specific numbers
hardcoded.
NOTE CONF
But to make it easier, I'm going to do that.
So I'm saying this is what should happen.
NOTE CONF
This is what I want this code to do.
So whatever add return is it should be equal to
NOTE CONF
this right.
So within assert you put in what you want to
NOTE CONF
be true.
And then you put a colon.
NOTE CONF
And colon means otherwise.
If this is not the case you print out a
NOTE CONF
message.
So I'm going to say error.
NOTE CONF
Uh.
Um.
NOTE CONF
Seven plus.
Oops.
NOTE CONF
Plus 12 is return.
It's given the value.
NOTE CONF
And then I'm going to say whatever that value is.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So I'm going to run this.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So here this is causing an exception.
And it's telling me what's going on.
NOTE CONF
It's telling me this is the error.
So that is much more useful when you're debugging.
NOTE CONF
So you can see this.
You can put in whatever you want the error to
NOTE CONF
be.
And that's quite useful.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So this is another way of helping it be easy
NOTE CONF
to find errors in your code.
Um, but there is a more common way.
NOTE CONF
And this is using tests.
These are these are unit tests.
NOTE CONF
We will be using these um, in we'll be using
these in inform be um, but you're not writing them
NOTE CONF
in form B, although they're actually really quite straightforward to
write but you will be using them.
NOTE CONF
That's important.
So you can add as many tests as you like.
NOTE CONF
You can run all the tests, or you can just
run a test ad as you go.
NOTE CONF
So you indicate.
So this is in a class which would usually be
NOTE CONF
called something test.
And then you indicate each test with this at test.
NOTE CONF
And that means that um IntelliJ or Java knows where
these tests are.
NOTE CONF
Uh these are always void.
You give them names.
NOTE CONF
Um, so which should often I mean, this kind of
normal nomenclature is quite useful.
NOTE CONF
So you.
Say you tell it what you want it to do.
NOTE CONF
Right.
So what I want this to do I want calculator
NOTE CONF
to.
So this is an example.
NOTE CONF
Say if I send one and two to a calculator
what I expect is this.
NOTE CONF
This is what what it does.
This is what I want the answer to be.
NOTE CONF
Um and assert equals means.
Uh, so so I'm saying these should be the same.
NOTE CONF
Right.
Result and expected should be the same.
NOTE CONF
I'm setting up.
This is my test condition.
NOTE CONF
This is what the answer should be.
This is what it's actually going to be.
NOTE CONF
And these really should be the same.
And these are not the same as a problem.
NOTE CONF
So if I run that okay.
That's going to that's not happy.
NOTE CONF
And it's telling me there's a problem.
So it's saying here are some not as expected.
NOTE CONF
That's because that's what I told it to print out.
I expected the answer to be three.
NOTE CONF
That's because this is how I told it to calculate
it.
NOTE CONF
But actually the answer is minus one.
So these tests are really important.
NOTE CONF
So you can either just run specific ones or you
can run everything on the whole class.
NOTE CONF
And this is saying great.
There's three tests.
NOTE CONF
One of them is failed.
Two of them have passed.
NOTE CONF
So overall you get this cross for the whole class.
Test class.
NOTE CONF
That means that there is at least one test in
there that hasn't passed.
NOTE CONF
And intelligent indicates this by the red.
The red exclamation marks.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So main methods can be used to quickly evaluate the
NOTE CONF
functionality of your code.
This is what I was doing with the print statements.
NOTE CONF
As you're going along, you might want to just quickly
check things.
NOTE CONF
Just check what things are look like.
Um, then that's fine.
NOTE CONF
Just to put it in print statements, but that's fairly
limited.
NOTE CONF
They have a few drawbacks.
It requires manual effort.
NOTE CONF
It's more error prone than doing proper testing.
So assertions are kind of helpful with that.
NOTE CONF
We've seen these assertions.
However, the tests are unorganised.
NOTE CONF
We're just putting them in in your coding.
There's no easy way to only test certain methods.
NOTE CONF
It's not easy to see everything all at once.
So the easiest way to do this is a test
NOTE CONF
framework.
And the test framework is the test class that we've
NOTE CONF
just seen.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So how do you decide what you're going to test.
So in the example we looked at we were testing
NOTE CONF
whether addition was working.
We just put in one plus two equals three right.
NOTE CONF
If that's working that's fine.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And you should do that.
You should put in general cases things that are quite
NOTE CONF
normal.
Um, regular use cases.
NOTE CONF
Make sure those are returning the right thing.
But also you have to think about corner cases.
NOTE CONF
What are the slightly weird cases that might happen?
So when you're doing things with numbers, this is very
NOTE CONF
often zero.
Um, it might be that, uh, things.
NOTE CONF
Is it handling negative numbers.
Right.
NOTE CONF
So you need to think about what are all the
what happens if you put a really large number in.
NOTE CONF
So you need to think about what are the ones
that might cause something slightly different and put in test
NOTE CONF
examples for those as well.
Um, what happens about invalid inputs.
NOTE CONF
So what happens if, um, I am doing something with
addition or I'm expecting integers and actually somebody send me
NOTE CONF
a string.
What am I going to do with that?
NOTE CONF
How am I going to respond to that?
Um, and you also need to look at positive testing
NOTE CONF
as well as negative testing.
So that means is it doing things right that it
NOTE CONF
should be.
Is is it succeeding when you want it to succeed?
NOTE CONF
But also does it fail when you want it to
fail?
NOTE CONF
So things failing is often really important in coding.
Like if this doesn't work, then you go off and
NOTE CONF
do something else.
You need to make sure it's failing at that point
NOTE CONF
when you want it to.
So make sure you put in those examples as well.
NOTE CONF
So one of the important things about writing good code
is being able to figure out how you should test
NOTE CONF
it and testing it really robustly.
And usually when things go wrong, when code is released,
NOTE CONF
it's because people haven't thought about specific cases and haven't
tested those cases.
NOTE CONF
They've just assumed that the cases they've tested it on
cover pretty much everything.
NOTE CONF
And they and they don't always.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So first of all, you want to test that your
code is is running fine.
NOTE CONF
And usually hopefully it is.
But if it isn't what do you do then you
NOTE CONF
have to debug.
Sometimes this is super obvious right?
NOTE CONF
If you have a function called add and you notice
there's a minus in there, okay.
NOTE CONF
You don't need any complex skills to debug that.
But when it's bigger than a test case, debugging can
NOTE CONF
be quite challenging.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So let's have a look again at IntelliJ.
Um okay.
NOTE CONF
Rotate debug.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So this is code uh which is taking.
So I'm creating this array.
NOTE CONF
And what I'm doing is I'm what I'm intending to
do is rotate it right.
NOTE CONF
So it starts off one, two, three, four, five.
What I want it to do is to return an
NOTE CONF
array to me.
That is five, four, three, two, one.
NOTE CONF
So everything's backwards.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So let's run that and see if that's what it
does.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
That's not what it does.
NOTE CONF
It returns 51111.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So it's got the it's brought the final one to
the first position.
NOTE CONF
Great.
But after that it has kind of messed up.
NOTE CONF
Um.
Oh, yeah.
NOTE CONF
I was going to do this, but I haven't got
a pen.
NOTE CONF
Maybe I'm just going to do this on here.
I'm going to use a chalkboard.
NOTE CONF
I haven't used a chalkboard for years.
Okay, let's see if I can write on the chalkboard
NOTE CONF
an intelligible way.
Okay, so one way you can do this is just
NOTE CONF
go by three by hand.
And if you've been in the tutorial or you go
NOTE CONF
to church today or tomorrow, you'll see there's a bit
of practice where we just go through through things by
NOTE CONF
hand.
And this can be really helpful just to just got
NOTE CONF
a few things down to give you an idea.
Right.
NOTE CONF
So my array.
Is oh God Go.
NOTE CONF
One.
Two.
NOTE CONF
Three.
Four.
NOTE CONF
Five.
Okay, so I is equal to I starting off at
NOTE CONF
okay.
You can shout out that is equal to zero.
NOTE CONF
So what do I need to know.
I need to know what's in array zero.
NOTE CONF
And what's the answer.
Okay one.
NOTE CONF
And now I'm saying that array.
Array a I plus one which is array one is
NOTE CONF
equal to array zero which is one.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So now at the end of this loop my array
is going to be what's my array going to be.
NOTE CONF
11345.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So I can tell even from just going through ones.
Right.
NOTE CONF
There's a problem here because two is completely vanished.
I'm not going to be able to put two into
NOTE CONF
the final answer at all because I've lost it.
I'm not keeping it anywhere, but I've got this duplication
NOTE CONF
of one, right.
So right away I can see there's a problem going
NOTE CONF
on somewhere here where I'm overwriting things that I need
to not be overwriting.
NOTE CONF
That's really helpful for debugging.
Okay, so that's one way you can do it.
NOTE CONF
Um, but there's also lots of super useful tools in
an IDE.
NOTE CONF
Um, okay.
So.
NOTE CONF
Why is this just spinning?
Oh, come on IntelliJ.
NOTE CONF
Don't be.
Annoying.
NOTE CONF
Right.
Let's reboot IntelliJ.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Uh, rotate.
NOTE CONF
Debug.
Okay, so we're running that, and that was fine.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So now we're going to put in debug points or
NOTE CONF
we're going to put in stop points.
Right.
NOTE CONF
So you might have seen I quite often do this
when I'm trying to click on this I actually accidentally
NOTE CONF
click on here.
And this creates, in this case a red diamond.
NOTE CONF
But if you do it lower down it'll create a
red circle okay.
NOTE CONF
And this is a stop point.
And what this means is um, I want to I
NOTE CONF
want to go through actually, let me just show you
this first.
NOTE CONF
Um, so when you click the green arrow, we've always
just been choosing the first one which is just running
NOTE CONF
it.
But you see down here there's also debug.
NOTE CONF
So let's debug it okay.
So that's not telling us something very useful.
NOTE CONF
Um let's say we put a stop point in here
and this is saying I want what I want to
NOTE CONF
see.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
That's because I'm, I'm not telling it to tell me
anything about the debugging.
NOTE CONF
But now I'm saying here, this is my stop.
I want you to tell me what is happening here.
NOTE CONF
Right.
So let's try debugging this again.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Now we're getting all this information.
NOTE CONF
Can you see that well enough.
Oh, also, I've just remembered I supposed to turn it
NOTE CONF
on to black.
Well, I'll leave that to the next lecture, but remind
NOTE CONF
me to do it then, if I forget.
So I hope this isn't too small to see.
NOTE CONF
But you can see it's telling me at this line
here.
NOTE CONF
These are the values we've got, right?
So this is what the array looks like the first
NOTE CONF
time we get here.
So it's always going to be the first time around.
NOTE CONF
It is zero.
The array dot length is five.
NOTE CONF
Array zero is one.
Array one plus I plus one is two.
NOTE CONF
And so the what is in position I plus one
is two.
NOTE CONF
And what is in position I is one.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Now you can see here are some these are these
are the um choices you can make.
NOTE CONF
So step over essentially step over and step into the
ones you're going to use the most.
NOTE CONF
Step over is like I'm in a loop.
I don't care what happens in the sleep.
NOTE CONF
I want to jump out of the sleep.
I want to know what comes out of this loop.
NOTE CONF
Whereas step into means I want to go through this
loop and see what's happening.
NOTE CONF
So let's press step into okay.
So now you can see this is changing right.
NOTE CONF
So we've got we've we've gone on to the next
step of the loop.
NOTE CONF
So at the beginning we had I plus one was
two.
NOTE CONF
But now because of this assignment.
I plus one equals one.
NOTE CONF
And we can already now see this problem coming in
because this has changed the array to 113452 is disappeared
NOTE CONF
as we saw by hand.
We can step into it further.
NOTE CONF
And it's keep it keeps on making these changes.
So this is really helpful in seeing what goes wrong.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So you're going to use that a lot.
NOTE CONF
There's other things you can do with it.
So say for example I'm not interested in looking at
NOTE CONF
what happens when I equals zero.
But there's a particular point I'm concerned about.
NOTE CONF
We can if we right click on this.
Oops sorry.
NOTE CONF
Why is this not coming up.
Oh that's weird.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Sorry.
NOTE CONF
Um, we can add a conditional breakpoint, right?
So that means I say I don't want it just
NOTE CONF
to break any time on this line.
I want it to break under certain conditions, and I
NOTE CONF
want it to break.
Let's say I want it to.
NOTE CONF
I want to look at what happens when I is
two.
NOTE CONF
So if if I is equivalent to two, then I
want you to break.
NOTE CONF
Now we run through that.
And we will see that.
NOTE CONF
Oh.
That's.
NOTE CONF
Oh, sorry.
That's because I chose run.
NOTE CONF
And I should choose debug.
So it'll never give you debugging information, even with breakpoints,
NOTE CONF
unless you tell it you want it to debug.
So now when I run that debug, we see we're
NOTE CONF
already looking at the situation where I is two and
already at this stage, um, the array is 1143.
NOTE CONF
So that's allowing us to look at a specific point.
So these are super useful tools that you're going to
NOTE CONF
be using a lot.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So we've done all that.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So debugging strategies we've got the manual walkthrough.
Uh we've got logging um which is uh yeah.
NOTE CONF
So you look at you walk through, you look at
what's going on at each point or you use the
NOTE CONF
debugger.
I don't know why this is.
NOTE CONF
Oh my God, what's wrong with my laptop at the
moment?
NOTE CONF
I don't know why this isn't full screen.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So what do you do when you find errors?
This is really important.
NOTE CONF
How do we handle invalid input for a start?
Okay.
NOTE CONF
This generates a sequence of numbers.
What?
NOTE CONF
So what could go wrong here?
What might be a problem.
NOTE CONF
So we're testing.
That starts as an end okay.
NOTE CONF
So one thing that can happen.
Let's have a look.
NOTE CONF
Invalid input.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So if we say the sequence is 7 to 15
is going to return.
NOTE CONF
This is a sequence, right.
But can somebody give me a number that's going to
NOTE CONF
cause a problem.
19.
NOTE CONF
Exactly right.
So I run that.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
This is a problem, right?
NOTE CONF
Because this is just assuming that start is going to
be less than zero.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So I can simplest thing to do is to add
NOTE CONF
a comment.
I can just say here, I can say, uh, by
NOTE CONF
the way start Must be less than.
End.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So this is really quite useful for me when I'm
NOTE CONF
doing it.
Remember what I have to think about.
NOTE CONF
It's not useful to anybody else.
Nobody wants to look into my code to see what
NOTE CONF
comments I've written.
So that can be useful as a memory to you,
NOTE CONF
as a reminder to yourself.
But it's not always that useful.
NOTE CONF
What I can do, I can put in an if
statement.
NOTE CONF
So if it's the case that start is bigger than
end, then I just want to print out.
NOTE CONF
Oh, there's a problem here.
Problem.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So that's going to fail.
NOTE CONF
Does something print out problem.
What's going on there?
NOTE CONF
Anything else?
Oh, yeah.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Sorry.
NOTE CONF
So I put it in the wrong place because I've
already tried to create an array of negative size, and
NOTE CONF
then that's when.
Oh, God.
NOTE CONF
That's when the problem is going to come.
So I'm going to get rid of this.
NOTE CONF
That's going to go right at the beginning.
Right.
NOTE CONF
So before I even try to create the array.
I'm going to put this in and run that.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So I get the same thing.
NOTE CONF
But I've got already this message coming through.
Right.
NOTE CONF
Thank you very much.
I'm terrible at live debugging by the way.
NOTE CONF
When you debug I recommend do not do it in
front of a whole class of people because it's really
NOTE CONF
stressful.
So comments from the floor is super helpful.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So that's a way of doing it.
NOTE CONF
That's kind of a little bit more useful.
But prints and you will use print statements to pick
NOTE CONF
up errors.
That's common, but it's not really a great solution for
NOTE CONF
finished code.
For one thing, it's printing these things out all over
NOTE CONF
the place, which is not necessarily what you want to
do.
NOTE CONF
So what what we do here is we use throw
exception okay.
NOTE CONF
So we throw exceptions.
We use a the method is throw.
NOTE CONF
And then we have to create a new instance.
So we use a keyword new.
NOTE CONF
And then it's going to Java.
IntelliJ will give us some examples of what we want.
NOTE CONF
And what we want is a legal argument exception.
And then we send a message and it should be
NOTE CONF
start, uh, should be less than end or whatever we
want it to be.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So when we run that.
NOTE CONF
That is going to throw this exception.
So this is a much more organised, clear way to
NOTE CONF
do it.
You'll be able to see all the exceptions.
NOTE CONF
You've got this error message coming out which is attached
to the specific, um, thing that you're looking for.
NOTE CONF
So this is a much more organised way to do
it.
NOTE CONF
And we'll look at a lot more of that, um,
over the time over, over the course.
NOTE CONF
Uh, okay.
So these are all examples of things that can go
NOTE CONF
wrong.
You can have a look at these in more detail
NOTE CONF
and it doesn't contaminate the code.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So which do you use for private methods.
We've not really looked at private methods but we will
NOTE CONF
do later.
You can use assertion if it helps you.
NOTE CONF
It doesn't matter.
Nobody else cares.
NOTE CONF
But for public methods you should be using these, uh,
exceptions.
NOTE CONF
Okay, let me just really quickly finish.
So we've looked at these three types of types of
NOTE CONF
errors.
Um three different testing strategies.
NOTE CONF
The three debugging strategies and the three kinds of error
handling.
NOTE CONF
And this is oh that's the end.
This is really important.
NOTE CONF
We'll have a lot of practice on this.
So okay we've just made it to the end of
NOTE CONF
the lecture which I'm really pleased about is just on
time.
NOTE CONF
So I'm going to look at all your questions and
answer them on Monday.
NOTE CONF
See you on Monday.
Uh, have a good rest of the week and do
NOTE CONF
get in touch if there's any more, um, problems.
And by the way, the Wu club remains open.
NOTE CONF
If you've got other questions you want to put up
on that for me to answer on Monday.
NOTE CONF
That will stay open until Monday.
You can always add to that.
NOTE CONF
Oh, sorry.
Excuse me.
NOTE CONF
I have other questions about this one.
So yesterday you had like.
NOTE CONF